Good morning.
It's Friday morning.
How many people are awake?
It's great to see such a good-sized crowd
here on the last day of the conference.
I hope you have a good day today.
We have a great show this morning.
I'd like to bring on Dave Payne,
Manager of
Developer Tools Applications Group,
and he's going to talk about debugging.
Thanks, Jeffrey.
So did you all enjoy
our campus last night?
Nice place, isn't it?
Alright, so lots to cover this morning.
Let's go ahead and get started.
What we're going to cover today
is an overview of debugging
on Mac OS X in general.
And there's a variety
of ways to go about it.
We have two integrated development
environments at this point,
Project Builder and CodeWarrior.
So we'll be taking a look at
debugging with both of those.
First off,
we'll dive into Project Builder,
take a look at some more detailed stuff
than I did in my sessions on Wednesday.
Then we'll take a look at some advanced
debugging techniques that are really
getting down and dirty with gdb,
the command line debugger.
Then bring Metroworks on stage to take a
look at debugging in CodeWarrior Pro 6.
So really,
which of these that you use depends
on what you're building on Mac OS X.
There's a lot of different pieces
of software that you can build.
And how you debug it
depends on how you built it.
You can't build the same things with
the various sets of tools at the moment.
So there are different
debugging techniques depending
on what you're doing.
So let's first talk about the
overall debugging architecture.
Both Apple and Metrowerks have worked
together to come up with mechanisms
that will work with the system.
Both Project Builder and CodeWarrior
do take advantage of gdb as the
common debugging services substrate.
gdb handles all the interaction
with the Core OS and the interaction
with your target application.
In the case of Project Builder,
we talk pretty directly
to it on Mac OS X itself.
In the case of CodeWarrior,
Apple and Metrowerks work together
to design a mechanism to allow
the CodeWarrior IDE to work with
debugging just as it always has.
Specifically,
it's taking advantage of the
Metrowerks debugging protocol to
go through and talk to a debug
knob that we worked on together.
The debug knob handles
communication to gdb.
So the debug knob runs on the
Mac OS X machine with gdb and
with your target application.
Because it's going through the
Metrowerks-- it's actually a remote
debugging protocol-- CodeWarrior
can work on Mac OS 9 or Mac OS X and
do debugging of applications there.
But again, which one you use depends
on what you're building.
With Carbon applications,
you can build them as
either Maco or with Pef.
For all else in the system,
Maco is the primary binary
format for the system.
It's the native format.
It's what we use for everything.
So we've built the OS with
that since essentially the dawn
of time from the base that we
developed it from back at Next.
So all of our tools
are optimized for that,
from the development tools on
through the performance tools.
So you can get access to the entire
system by making Maco applications.
So all of the BSD APIs are accessible,
all of your frameworks.
So Cocoa, all of the Carbon frameworks
are actually implemented as
Maco frameworks on the system.
So you can write all different
types of applications as Maco.
If you're writing--
say an I/O Kit module,
so a device driver or kernel extension,
you would do that in Maco as well.
You can use Maco in a Pef
application by doing a Maco plugin,
a CFPlugin, that loads transparently.
You don't have to know that it's Maco,
really.
So the new project builder IDE fully
supports development with Maco.
Gdb supports debugging of that.
MetroWorks will be working to provide
a full Maco development suite as well.
So you'll have that option as well
in a future release of MetroWorks.
Your other option for Carbon binaries
is to develop a PEF binary.
That's the native format on Mac OS 9.
We've provided a code fragment manager
to load PEF containers on Mac OS X to
provide transitional support for
Carbon applications coming in.
You can have-- one of these
PEF binaries can actually run
on both Mac OS 9 or Mac OS X.
Our preference, actually,
is that you use the new bundle
packaging scheme to come up with
an app package that you can take
advantage of localization and
everything else from the app package.
You can have a Mako binary for
Mac OS X and a PEF binary for Mac OS 9
and be double-clickable on each.
But PEF alone is an acceptable option.
To do that today,
you would use CodeWarrior to do that.
So Metrowerk has provided full
debug and support for CodeWarrior
binaries running on-- or
Carbon PEF binaries running on Mac OS X.
So again, Metroworks is also working to
provide Mako functionality.
And in my project builder
session on Wednesday,
we also demonstrated kind of a
bleeding edge functionality of
generating a PEF binary from
the project builder IDE as well.
So we're trying to
move in that direction.
The goal is that both environments
provide all options and give
you as much choice as possible.
So with that introduction,
I'd like to bring on Rab Hagy,
debugging engineer for Project Builder.
And he'll take you through some of
the Project Builder debugging details.
Thanks, Dave.
Good morning, everyone.
I'll be talking about Project Builder
and debugging on Mac OS X and some
of the larger issues that you might
run into specific to Mac OS X.
Project Builder has a number
of features for debugging,
the most obvious of which is
a graphical user interface for
displaying threads and stacks and such.
In addition,
we have features for supporting the
so-called Mac OS X platform initiatives,
mainly Carbon and its
use of opaque data types,
and the semantics of the Mac OS X dynamic
shared library mechanism.
Uh,
Because we encourage the use of
frameworks and shared libraries,
Project Builder supports cross-project
debugging where one project can build the
framework and another project can use it.
Finally, we have full breakpoint support.
We'll be talking about
each of these in turn.
First let's start off
with opaque data types.
Now, if you looked at
Carbon or Core Foundation,
you know that many of the data types,
all you get is a reference.
You don't know what the actual
structure of the data type is.
And as a developer,
you can appreciate the advantages
to hiding your implementation
so you can change it later on.
But it's also difficult to debug with
opaque data types or abstract data
types because you can't look into them.
So how can we debug these
in the Mac OS X environment?
Well, we have to change our
approach a little bit.
Typically,
a debugger reaches in and looks
at the state of data structures,
but you can't do that
with opaque data types.
So what we can do is we can take
advantage of the debugging system
on Mac OS X and run functions
during the debugging session
inside the debugged process.
And these functions can inspect
and provide information about
the state of these data types.
Principle 1 and core
foundation is CF-SHOW,
which gives a textual
representation of the CFData types,
dictionaries, and strings, and so forth.
In Carbon,
there are a number of functions
specifically there for debugging.
Some take as a parameter a
data type such as a dialog,
a menu,
or a window and print out information.
Some just print out information
about the application as a whole,
like a print resource chain prints
all the information about the
resources active at the moment.
And then there's some in the QuickDraw
framework that instead of providing
a textual information provide a
graphical information such as flashing
a clip region or visible region,
which actually is a lot
easier than looking at numbers
representing pixel positions.
So now,
let's talk a bit about shared libraries.
And we use the term
dynamic shared libraries,
or DILIBs, on Mac OS X to emphasize
the specific semantics of
shared libraries on Mac OS X.
They come in, well, we say two types,
but it's more of two ways of
representing on the file system,
a standalone shared library or a shared
library packaged inside a framework.
And if you work with shared libraries,
you know that if you have multiple
versions of them on your system and
you start running your application
and debugging with the wrong version,
you can waste a lot of time till
you come to that realization.
So how do we avoid this problem?
The general question we want
to explore is that on Mac OS X,
shared libraries and frameworks
are designed to be installed
at a specific location.
And how do you do development when
you don't want to install them?
So let's look at the details
of how this process works.
At build time,
when you build your shared library,
part of your configuration
information you give to the build
system in Project Builder is the
path where you're going to install
the framework or the shared library.
And that path is independent
of where you actually build it.
At build time of the executable,
the static link editor, LD,
takes this install path from the shared
library and records it in the executable.
So that at runtime for the executable,
the dynamic editor then has a very
easy way to find the shared library.
It's been told, ah, here's the path,
where to look for it.
So that's very efficient,
but during development,
there are a couple reasons why
you wouldn't want to install
your shared library or framework.
The first is, as a developer,
you're probably running as your own
user ID with permissions that don't
allow you to actually install or
modify files inside the file system.
Usually that's done as
root or administrator.
The second reason you may not be
able to install a shared library is,
well, you've already got one there.
You've got a stable
version of your system,
and you as a developer want to develop,
move forward on your own set of code.
And therefore you want to develop
and run and compile with your
own copy of the shared library.
So at the lowest level,
here's how we can address this.
There are various environment variables
that control how the dynamic link editor,
DYLD,
Accesses and Finds Shared Libraries.
And if you do end up using these,
you should consult the manual page,
man-dyld, and find out all you can do
with the dynamic link editor.
If you're also going to MacHack,
it might provide some interesting tips.
If you do do this,
be sure to be aware of the gdb
command info shared libraries,
which prints out all the shared
libraries used by the debug process.
Once again,
we're just trying to save you time
from debugging the wrong thing.
If you use Project Builder,
we take care of all this for you so that
you can just build your projects and
click the run button or the debug button
and we run with the right versions.
And we'll go into detail about how
to set up Project Builder to do that.
As a heads up, coming down the road,
we're really encouraging
using the app packaging model.
And one of the things we plan to
put into the package are private
frameworks used by the application.
We're not quite there yet,
but the intent is the application
will be completely self-contained.
Now that, if you put your shared
library inside a framework,
inside the packaging, it,
not only do you get the
advantages of the framework,
being able to put your header
files there and so forth,
but we also have the ability to
put more than one copy of a shared
library inside the framework.
Typically, these are binary files.
The shared libraries
implement the same set of API.
They're the same version,
but they're just compiled differently
with different options tailored towards
specific operations you might want to do.
The standard version of a shared
library is optimized code,
minimal symbols.
That's what's used at
runtime and for deployment.
The debug version is tailored towards
The development process and doing runtime
error checking at core foundation and
Carbon do extra checking of parameters.
They can do internal state
checking to ensure consistency
that the APIs are used correctly.
And finally,
there's a profiled version which is
used with the Gprof profiling system.
Again,
the low level environment variable that
controls this is DYLD image suffix,
but Project Builder allows
you to access these directly.
So now we'll talk a bit more in
detail about Project Builder itself,
go over how to configure things,
breakpoints, and then we'll have a demo.
As we've said, Project Builder enables
cross-project debugging.
And to do that,
you need to build your projects,
and specifically the
products of your project,
and have them put in a common
location so that we can find them
at compile time and at run time.
We'll go over in the demo how to do that.
We use the term executable for the
thing that you're going to debug.
It can be, for right now, it's a binary.
It can eventually be Java or it
could be some other kind of program.
You can set various
settings on the executable,
such as the arguments,
essentially the command line arguments,
argv and argc,
passed to the program at launch.
You can also control choosing
the debugger and such.
Just to go over a few
things about breakpoints,
Project Builder has, of course,
standard breakpoints and
files at specific locations.
There are also ways to set
breakpoints on functions,
just via the name of the
function symbolically.
And that's useful if you want to
break inside a library function,
such as Carbon,
and see why this function is being
called and what the stack backtrace is.
We have a summary of all the
breakpoints in your project,
and the key word is here,
they're your breakpoints,
and each member of the development team
has his or her own set of breakpoints
that are stored independently,
but persistently.
So now I'd like to bring up Dave Ewing,
who's going to help me
with the... there he is,
the demo.
Dave works on our Java debugger.
All right, if we can have-- all right,
demo three.
All right.
First, let's look at the build
preferences in Project Builder.
And the key here is just want to
show you that there are two settings,
which are file system paths,
which are where you build.
And this is very important to set for
cross project debugging and runtime
settings so we can find your frameworks.
OK.
Now let's look at the Targets tab.
A target has many settings,
and a target logically has an
executable or a set of executables.
You can add your own if
your project builds a
and more.
The project builder is a library.
Or if you're working
with a legacy project,
so-called, that uses the Make system,
it's an open source project,
you can point Project Builder to
the executable you want to run.
Down at the bottom,
you can see three tabs that control the
settings for the executable arguments.
Let's go to Debugger just quickly.
We know, in most cases,
what debugger to use.
There are various corner cases.
If you're debugging Java and
you've got native code and you
want to use the gdb debugger,
that's what you'd come
here and select that.
Then there's a Runtime tab.
I should mention that this version
of Project Builder is post-DP4.
The Runtime tab isn't on there.
But it gives you an idea.
We can now select which variants
of the system framework.
Same works to use.
Standard, Debugger, Profile.
All right.
So let's go back to the Arguments tab.
Great.
And we've added some arguments there,
and let's select the
trace and crash option.
and we'll run with it.
This is appearance sample,
it's the standard example.
We've just added a few features
to look at these arguments.
If you see, we go to the slider,
and just move the slider a little bit.
We're printing out the
value of the slider.
The trace option controls that.
And if we move the slider
all the way to the left,
it's too big and we've crashed.
Just to note how to read the output here,
it says your program is
exited with a signal.
That's the Unix way of
saying there was an error,
in this case a bus error,
which means we've referenced some
memory that we shouldn't have.
All right.
Let's quickly look at
the breakpoints tab.
Just so you know,
list the breakpoints in a file.
If you double-click on it,
it will take you to the file
and show you the breakpoint.
Good way to navigate.
Breakpoints in Project Builder
can be enabled or disabled.
A disabled breakpoint remains in
your persistent set of breakpoints,
but it's not used by the debugger.
It's a good way to keep breakpoints
around but not trip over them every time.
Now let's fire up the debugger.
Let's make it a little bigger.
And we move the slider this time.
Trap on the breakpoints,
get a list of threads in the
stack we're in and variables.
All right, let's step--
Just a little bit to show you.
Can you close up the console, Dave,
so we can-- there we go.
You can see the local item value changed.
Now this is C++ program.
There's the implicit this
pointer pass to each method.
The way data is displayed for C++
objects is each superclass of your...
its member data is represented as kind of
a pseudo-structure that you can disclose.
Now we see there's a F dialog pointer,
and if we want to look at that, we say,
oops, we don't have the type
information for that.
That's an opaque type.
So how would we go about seeing what
information about this particular dialog?
So right now,
we bring down the console and
we can talk to gdb directly.
And Dave's going to
enter the magic command.
We tell gdb to call a function.
In the inferior,
so this function is actually
going to be executed by the debug
process in its address space,
and gdb is going to evaluate symbolic
arguments like F dialogue and pass,
essentially set up the calling
call site to call this function.
And you can see now we've got some
information about the dialogue and
Let's just do print resource change
just to show kind of some global
information that you can get from Carbon.
We're running a little short,
so let's just demo the symbolic
breakpoint just to show
you how that works quickly.
So you click New and you get a
text field to enter the name of a
function that you'd like to break at,
and you can just select
and some text in your code,
paste it in there.
And now if we continue.
We see that we hit that and can crawl
up the stack to find what we want.
Okay, I think we're running
a little short on time,
so thanks Dave.
If we can go back to the slides, please.
Just a note about what we're
planning in the future.
Project Builders are work in progress.
We know we have a large constituency
and each group has different needs.
Some want low-level,
some want more high-level.
We're planning to do all
that in the coming months.
Dave's working on Java debugging
which is coming along.
So later on we'll be giving you the
email list for feedback and we'd
really appreciate any feedback on the
debugging system and specifically what
features you'd uh... like to see in a
priority order so we can get into you
When you need them.
All right.
Now I'd like to bring up Klee Dienes.
He's our gdb expert.
[Transcript missing]
Once it's connected,
we're going to go ahead and
set a breakpoint in Open,
which is the Unix system
call for opening a file.
And we're going to go ahead
and continue the finder.
and Dave is going to do something
to cause it to open a file.
And you'll see over
in the command window,
the finder has stopped and opened.
We're going to take a look around,
sort of snoop a bit to see where we are,
maybe get a backtrace.
So you can see we've gone
through some chain of C++ calls,
as I wouldn't even
dream of understanding.
We're going to take a
look at our registers.
Take a look at our list of threads.
Basically, any information you might want
about the process is there.
I'm not going to go through
the whole list of commands,
but there's a ton of them.
You can, more interestingly,
give it some expressions to look at.
So you might want to... I guess
first we'll be looking at the...
You may as well finish.
You can give it commands
to apply to all commands.
In this case, we've gotten a backtrace
of all of the threads.
Or you might want to just
give it an expression.
So you might want to just tell it
to print the contents of register 3.
And I'll give it to you as an integer,
which isn't very useful,
so you might tell it to print it in hex.
Which really still isn't all that useful.
What you really want to do
is cast it to a car star and
take a look at it that way.
I'm not going to go too
far into the expression.
Basically, anything that's a legal
C expression is also an
expression that you can type here,
including function calls, commas,
anything you feel like.
As long as it's not a statement,
you're good to go.
What I'm going to do a little
bit more interesting is,
let's say I want to see all files
that have been opened by this program.
I'm going to set a command
on this breakpoint,
and what I'm going to do is I'm
going to tell it first to not print
the breakpoint line every time.
Then I'm going to tell it
to print the first argument,
which I just happen to know is R3 still.
And then I'm going to tell it
to just go ahead and continue
without stopping for me.
And now when I continue...
I can see all the files and all their
gory detail that's being opened.
This is interesting also just
because it's highly scriptable,
so if you need to get output
logs or in some other capacity,
you can do that.
You'll notice a lot of those
files are not all that meaningful.
They're basically an artifact
of our HFS implementation.
In this case, what I'd like to do is
just focus on the plist,
on our property list files.
So let's add a condition to the
breakpoint that lets us filter out
everything that does not end in .plist.
So if we're just interested
to see which files that end
in plist are getting opened,
we can actually attach a condition.
In this case,
we're just going to take R3 and we're
going to string compare it with .plist.
And if that expression
doesn't evaluate true,
in this case if it doesn't end in plist,
it's going to just skip
that breakpoint entirely.
Subtitles by the Amara.org community
And so now when we continue,
Now we just see the plists that
are being loaded by the system.
Thank you.
And certainly you can come up
with more elaborate examples.
I'm sure everybody will have
their own things that they
might want to do with that.
And really what this leads
into is how to extend gdb.
And so as I mentioned before,
gdb has a configuration language.
It's used by our system to configure
gdb with specific user interface things.
But it's also something that you
can use on your own to extend gdb.
So what I'm going to be showing is
basically a small profiling library
that we-- basically I had to add to gdb
one night about 3:00 in the morning.
I was desperate to figure
out a profiling problem,
desperate to get something to speed up.
And I just really needed to know
how long individual source lines in
my program were taking to execute.
So I genned up a little tiny program.
Most of that's documentation
that defines two commands.
One is mark,
which sets a stopwatch for CPU time.
And the other is cur,
which tells you how much CPU time you've
used since the last time you typed mark.
Basically it just calls the getRUsage
function in the system to tell you
how much CPU time has been used.
And so what we're going to do is
we're going to take a look at a small
program that I rigged up that's just
basically allocates 64 meg of memory
and zeroes it two different ways.
One way is the slow way.
The other way is the fast way.
And it's not a very interesting program.
But when we take a look at it,
it's pretty interesting.
Look at it.
He's just going to load
the iProfiling library.
So we take a look at main.
One more.
You'll see it makes a big buffer,
zeroes it the fast way,
if you can list that.
and then list the zeros at the slow way.
And what we'll find is
that when we run this,
I'm sorry?
I've got a break point.
Oh, I'd love a break point.
Thank you.
That would be very good.
When we run this,
we're going to step forward
to where we want to end up.
We're going to step to
right before the FAST 0.
We're going to set a mark.
We're going to step over FAST 0.
Step over, zero.
We're going to allocate 64 meg,
and then we're going to type
curr to see how long that took.
It should take about half a second.
Now we're going to reset the mark.
We're going to step
over to the next line.
And this one, I'm guessing,
will take about two seconds.
So, you know, you can just step right
through your program,
see how long each individual
function is taking,
real visual way of
finding the bottlenecks.
And what's interesting about this isn't
so much its use as a profiling tool,
although it really saved
my butt one Sunday night.
It's something that you're able to
rig up with very little effort just
by adding a few commands to gdb.
And I'm sure many of you will find
interesting ways to expand gdb in ways
appropriate to what you're working on.
You know, one thing that surprised me
just before we were putting
DP4 out was one of our support
engineers sent us an email saying,
"Hey, I really missed all
those max bugs commands,
so I rigged up a quick max
bug compatibility library."
And so, you know,
I gave it a try and I even,
I tried actually many of the Mac's bugs,
most of the Mac's bugs commands
that I knew and discovered actually
a good number of them work.
And again, you know,
it's not so much the commands as the
fact that you can add these things
pretty much however you might like.
So with that,
I will turn the stage back over
to Dave and I thank you very much.
[Transcript missing]
Well, if you were here at
our session last year,
we talked about debugging on Mac OS X.
And at that point,
Apple had helped us put together a
debug node that let us debug remotely
from a Mac OS 9 machine to Mac OS X.
And we've been busy since then
bringing CodeWarrior to Mac OS X.
And so today, I'd like to talk a little
bit about what we've got now.
This is all on a beta CD of
the Pro 6 tools that we've been
handing out here at the show.
The actual tools will
ship later this year,
but the CD has tools that you can
start now building and debugging
applications on Mac OS X.
So what's really new in these tools
is that the IDE is fully carbonized.
It runs natively on Mac OS X.
You can do single machine debugging.
So you can take all of
the Carbon PEF apps that
you've been running on 9,
carbonize them,
and use the same debugger on 10
that you've been debugging on 9.
We've also done a lot more work in
two-machine debugging for this release.
Before we did 9 to 9 debugging,
and we also did debugging from 9 to 10.
But we've fleshed that out now
so you can really do four-way
debugging from Mac OS 9 to Mac OS 9,
from 9 to 10, from 10 to 9,
and also from 10 to 10.
So you'll have a lot of options based on
what your host and target platform is.
And as Dave talked about,
the Metrix tools right now build
Carbon PEF applications for Mac OS X.
Our Maco tools are in development,
and you'll see those in later releases.
Right now these are designed to
transition your Carbon PEF apps
that you've been building on
9 and bring them to 10 and let
you debug them the same way.
So with that, I'll go to a demo and show
you what you can do with the
tools that are on the Pro 6 CD.
The first thing I'm going
to do is start DebugNub.
DebugNub is the piece of debugging
technology that Dave and Klee and his
team collaborated on with Metroworks
to provide a link between the
CodeWarrior debug protocols and gdb.
With the tools on the CD,
you have to start DebugNub manually,
but be sure and sign up to the
beta program and future releases
will do this for you automatically,
so you'll have the same seamless
debugging experience you have online.
So now I'll start the IDE and
open up a power plant sample.
Now, if any of you have tried to use
the two-machine debugger that
we shipped with the 5.3 tools,
I'll show you a couple differences
in doing remote debugging.
The user interface for setting
up remote debugging could be kind
of complicated with those tools
and wasn't very straightforward,
so we've done a lot of work on that.
Now, you can create a whole set of
address book-style remote connection
preferences where you can name
specific remote connections,
pick the debugger you're going to use,
and then enter the specific
IP address for them.
So, after you create a connection type,
In the Remote Connections panel,
you can go to your
project's target settings.
and and tell it specifically,
you can enable remote debugging,
and tell it specifically which connection
type you're going to work with.
Also specify the remote download path,
which if you're debugging on
Mac OS X needs to be a Unix-style path,
and also tell the debugger to launch
a remote host application if you're
remote debugging a shared library.
But for this demo,
I'm going to show single
machine debugging,
so I'll leave that turned off.
and go to the power plant sample.
And ask it to debug.
So what it's doing now is
launching your Carbon PEF app and
stopping at the first breakpoint.
Let me resize a couple windows.
So at this point,
you're in the same CodeWarrio
debugger that you've been using on 9.
You can do all the normal things, step,
set breakpoints, look at variables,
look at registers, processes,
all the same user interfaces
here available to you.
Breakpoints, run to those,
and then we continue running.
We have our power plant
appearance application.
find the source that creates a new
window instead of breakpoint here.
And then we stop at that breakpoint.
So as you can see here,
I'm not going to try and demo all
the debugger features in CodeWarrior,
because you're probably
familiar with them.
Really,
our news here is just that all those
same features are available natively on
Mac OS X for single machine debugging.
So that's really the demonstration
that all the same things you've
been used to doing on 9 can
now work on 10 on CodeWarrior.
We're also in the future working
with Apple to provide an interface
to some of the advanced gdb features
that Klee came out and talked about.
So we'll be extending CodeWarrior
debugging support on 10 to let
you do some of the things that gdb
makes possible on 10 that weren't
really very easy to do on 9.
So we'll be extending the user
interface to let you do those things
from inside Code Warrior as well.
Well, that's it for the CodeWarrior demo.
Again, all of the tools I showed you here
are available on the Pro 6 beta CD.
And that's been available
to people at our sessions.
We've been handing those out at the show.
And again,
please get into the beta program,
because we'll have new releases
over the summer that add additional
debugging support for Mac OS X and
just sort of polish up the Pro 6 tools.
Be sure and also send your feedback
to our website and send that
to us through the beta program.
Now, here's Godfrey again.
Big hands for Ken.
Thank you very much, Ken.
Okay, so this is just a slide
giving you some contact.
I repeat the developer
tools group email address,
so you can contact us with
feedback and your ideas.
You can always contact me as
the technology manager for
development tools at Apple,
and Ken Ryall,
the core debugger engineering
lead at Metrowerks.
And with that, we have one more session
in the tools track.
Immediately after this one in Hall C,
we have a feedback forum for
the Apple developer tools.
Hope to see a good number of you there.
Okay, with that, we can bring the house
lights up and start Q&A.
Can I ask our presenters
to come up on stage?